Political science, who came here from the
northeast,
looked very, very sophisticated, sounded very
sophisticated. At its first meeting in the
academic council, which was composed of deans and
department heads and vice presidents, and this
was during the 60s when there were campus
disruptions around the nation, very few here This
man came in at his first academic council meeting
saying that A&M was sitting on a powder keg, it was
about to explode, that the students were near
white, and that he was the only one on the campus who
recognized this, and the only one that the
students had confidence that they could share
their concerns with. But that didn't exactly get
him off to the best start with deans and department
heads who had been here for a number of years who
really thought they had some idea about what A&M
was like and were awed in admiration about this man
who had been here for a month and understood so much
more than they did.
Later, this same person came into Dean Hubert's
office when I was there. This was probably three
years later or something like that. He had not
adjusted A&M much better, nor had A&M adjusted him
very well. And I don't remember what the topic was,
but I remember the man saying, Dean Hubert, if you
don't agree to this, I'll have no choice other than
to submit my resignation. And very deliberately.
Dean Hubert opened the bottom right-hand drawer
of his desk, took out a blank sheet of paper and
said, Professor Department Head, I accept your
resignation. The Department Head was absolutely
shocked and had no choice other than to follow
through with what he just said. And that convinced
me forever and ever that I would never make a threat
that I wasn't willing to live with. I've heard some
stories about faculty members who apparently
came here with fraudulent resumes, vitas, etc.,
and this being called to Dean Hubert's attention.
Can you share any examples of that? Well, one of
them was a man who came here and he was the director
of the Creative Application of Technology in
Education, CATE. And Dean Hubert was always
interested in
educational technology.
And I'll come back later to more of that. But this
man came in with electronic teaching devices,
television, and all that, and strongly
opinionated. And there were some people who did
not respond very well to him and did some checking
and found out that he had falsified his doctoral
degree from UCLA and when Frank Hubert confronted
him with this, the man's response was, I thought I
earned a PhD. And he was gone pretty quickly and he
did not last very long. We had another person in
education psychology who came in with a prolific
list of publications.
Just overwhelming. And after having several
graduate students
be surprised by some of the statements that the man
made, they started checking his list of
publications and found that it was probably 80%
fraudulent. And again, he left very quickly and
surprisingly enough went to a more lucrative job
in private industry. Alright, now let's go back to
your trail. You became the associate dean of
liberal arts and the dean was then? David Maxwell.
Describe, Dave, his style. David Maxwell came in
from Indiana University.
And he was wound very tight.
He was very outgoing, casual in his approach, yet
high standards. had his North Carolinian charm. I
think he was from North Carolina. He made people
feel very much at ease. The biggest surprise I got
from David was one fairly wintery day, I guess. We
had one of our rare snow falls and so we all got to
work and about nine o'clock got the phone call and
it was David Maxwell. And I said, yes. And he said,
what are you doing at work? And I said, well, I don't
know what you're asking. I work here. He said,
well, what about the snow? And I said, well, what
about it? He said, who else is there? And I said,
well, let me put it this way. You're the only one not
here. And so with my Texas background, thinking
that someone who'd been in Indiana for a while
would not be the least bit perturbed, he said,
well, why don't you send everyone home? And I said,
well, why would we send anyone home? I said, you
know, it's really great, because there are almost
no people here. We're getting a lot of work done.
And by this afternoon, the snow will be gone. So
it'll be a lot safer for them to go home at the
regular time. He said, I'll see you in just a few
minutes. About 15 minutes, he was there in the
office. Day worked. He was an economist. And the
economics department was one of the rising stars
in the College of Liberal Arts, as far as the
reputation of the faculty members. But like I
said, the thing I remember most about Day His
charm, his warmth,
and his standards. Key decisions, plus or minus,
you remember during those years? I think probably
the key decision was, again, allocation of
resources to the Economics Department because it
received a real disproportionate share there for
a while. But it was one of those areas that I think
Frank Hubert had been directly involved in
highlighting is this is one of the departments
that we really wanted to bring to the forefront
within the College of Liberal Arts. Q Do you have
any idea how that decision came and with them? A I
really don't. I would like to know. It may have been
one of those that the time was right, and certainly
we went with a more conservative economist. I
think that fit in with the ideas of a lot of the
members of the Board of Regents, so I would suspect
that they were involved in that. Certainly it was
not on the liberal side. I've heard stories from
Neil Greenhut that when he came for an interview
that President Rutter gave him a long lecture
about not being liberal, liberal, liberal, which
was a good deal of a waste of time saying that to
Greenwald. He certainly wasn't going to be
liberal. That economics emphasis began under
Hubert. Under Hubert. And then continued under
Maxwell. That's right. Would the fact that
Maxwell was an economist, reckon that had
anything to do with his being selected as dean? I
don't think it hurt him. Okay. That's the answer I
would have given. Because as far as I recall, it was
a real search. Yes. And House of the Liberal Arts
was housed in those days? Still in the activity
building. Okay. Well, take it back. Take that
back. I guess by that time, we had moved into Rudder
Tower. Who
were the key staff members in the college? Were
there key people in the office? Peggy Ritchie was
there who went with education. Mrs. Frank Lowe,
when I first went to the office. That was one of the
stories, again, that I enjoyed. Because when I
went there, there was a little half moon behind the
academic building that had reserved parking.
And so Mrs. Franklow told me what I would need to do
to get my reserved parking. And I said, Mrs.
Franklow, I really don't need reserved parking. I
get here early enough that it's not a problem. And I
don't need to park right there. And I don't move my
car during the day. And so I don't really need it.
And I remember her saying, Barry, clearly Dean
McCandless, the associate dean, has always had a
reserved parking space. And I said, you know, Ms.
Frankl, I think I'd really like to get one of those
reserved parking spaces. So anyway, I learned
that very quickly.
After Mrs. Frankl retired, who, and Peggy Ritchie
goes to education, I'm trying to remember who,
Mrs. Spinner. Who was the, was there an assistant
dean? Henry Pope was an assistant dean part of the
time. Jack Humphreys, who went from here to Sam
Houston and then became president. Saul Ross. And
maybe Ed Hunts was also, and dies as a young man.
Yes, really an outstanding, later graduate,
really quality person. So mostly, Dean Hubert
used doctoral students to do a kind of a business
type of arrangement as assistant deans. Now then,
in liberal arts, was there an assistant dean when
you and Maxwell were working together? Rufus
Waters served as. What were his duties? more along
the business aspects of it. Alright. Give me a
typical summary of your specific task as
Associate Dean of Liberal Arts. Primarily, it was
related to student affairs, because again, at
that point, all the undeclared majors in the
university were under Liberal Arts, and so I had
the direct responsibility for those all the
student programs, and a fair amount to do with the
curriculum,
but primarily
the student programs. There must have been some
nobody else would believe that it really happened
type stories with some students. Well, you know,
I'm not sure. I'll tell you two quick stories for
the far ends of the spectrum.
Because I would use graduate students to help
advise and sometimes counsel the students. And
some of them were fairly severe. We had one student
who was the only one in all the time I've been
involved in higher education that told people
that he would never to be asked to wait, because I
truly believed him to be suicidal. And I had a
graduate student who wanted to be a clinical
psychologist named Jan Werner. And so I talked to
Jan. I said, Jan, are you really sure that you want
to be a clinical psychologist? And she was
absolutely certain that she did. She wound up
seeing this student several times because he came
in and was really, really disturbed that we did
everything we could to get him involved with the
counseling center. But still he had a lot of
problems. And so one day he came in and he had sort of
latched on to Jan. And Jan almost shuddered when he
came through the door. And she did her job and did it
well. But when she left, I said, Jan, now think
about it. Would you like to spend the rest of your
life, professional life, dealing with six to
eight of those people every day with that level of
difficulty? And she left here to become the
counseling director at Southwest Louisiana. So
she became a counseling psychologist rather than
a clinical psychologist. But there were a lot of
students who would come back later and say, Dean
McCown, I want to thank you because without you I
would never have graduated from A&M. And several
of you would wonder, what in the world did I do? No
way. One where I really flubbed up, I had a student
who had just gone on academic probation. And his
name was something like Schultz, and he was from
Schulenburg, and he was failing the first
semester of freshman German for the third time.
And so I thought, well, I'll start out being a
little light-hearted.
And I said, why in the world are you having so much
difficulty in German? I said, isn't it kind of
embarrassing with a name like Schultz from
Schulenburg, and you're from German for the third
time? And he said, well, it's damn sure not
inherited. And I said, well, forget the humor. And
I said, well, do you mind telling me why you chose
German? He said, well, I've got to take some kind of
language. And he said, my brother told me that it
would probably take me eight semesters to pass
four. And I said, well, did you just really want to
learn German because of your heritage? Or no, I
just had to take something. I thought I'd take
that. And I said, well. You are a psychology major.
He said, yes. I said, do you realize you don't have a
language
requirement? He said, oh my god, I'll kill you. And
his brother was a history major who did have a
language requirement. But this kid had signed up
for Germany three times, apparently never looked
at his catalog. Apparently, his advisor had never
asked him why he was doing this. So he had lost 12
hours of grade points on a course he didn't like,
didn't want, and didn't really need to earn his
degree. So you can do a lot of things to help
students avoid difficulty. And one of my lines
was, it's a lot easier to stay out of the hole than it
is to get out of the hole. So there were a lot of
things that were not overwhelming in the cosmic
theme of the world. But meant a lot to individual
students. So primarily you were the chief student
advising officer. That's right. For all of
liberal arts and for all of the undeclared majors.
So you didn't have to deal with the, normally with
the faculty matters. To an extent. Because again,
basically at that time the dean's office was
essentially a two-man show. And so whatever the
Didn't want to do it. I did. But one of the things
that I did appreciate about them, really everyone
I've ever worked for, and I feel blessed with, they
gave me my area of responsibility and they let me do
it. I don't feel I was ever suddenly gassed. I never
felt that I lacked the authority to do what I was
doing. And all those received a lot of support and I
was grateful for that. They weren't looking over
my shoulder. During that era, According to the way
students thought of it, what were the tough majors
and the easy majors on campus? Were there any,
supposing? Well, somewhat facetiously,
engineering was thought of as pre-business.
Engineering, I think, was always thought of as one
of the tough majors. I think most of the areas of
science, particularly physical sciences, were
thought of as demanding. Math was always thought
of to be a tough major.
I think that at that point, business was not
considered to be one of the most demanding.
Agriculture, several were. more humane than some
of the others. Local arts, education were the ones
that, the ones that were not science and
technology oriented were often viewed to be the
ones that were a little less demanding. I make
believe that I didn't know anything about the
registration system. Describe student
registration in a typical semester. When I came,
we did the mass registration, and most often at
SEVISA, which I'm one of the few people in the world
who really thought was pretty good and enjoyed.
Because in the time that you could get most of the
faculty together in one building and have a chance
to walk around and see your colleagues and visit,
there was a lot of social interaction. among the
people, the students, and the faculty. And every
student had to get their assignment signed off by
the associate dean, as well as a departmental
representative. So in a lot of ways, there was a lot
of opportunity for personal involvement. And one
of the things that I thought was regrettable,
there were a lot of people who thought that was the
only time that people got any advisable. As an
undergraduate, I had always this with Carl
Landis. I knew what I was going to sign up for. So
when I went over there, it was just the formality of
going through it. If you can't get this, you had
plan B and all that.
But it was just a mass coming together. One of the
things I remember that bothered me early was there
was one sheet that had like eight different
sections of it. And you had to fill it out. And you
had to write your name on each one of them and your
address. And I thought, my gosh. I still got the
same name. I still got the same address. And so
anyway, technology has helped eliminate that.
Again, one of the stories, a true story that I
enjoyed, had a man named Russ Weider in physical
education. He was a combatives expert. He had been
a professional boxer, a professional wrestler.
He had given platform diving exhibitions. And
according to Russ, he was one of the first 24
nationally accredited fencing masters in the
United States. And I used to get a bad time about
fencing, but one day, a student was coming through
in the summer to register for the fall, and he had to
take a physical education course, and he wasn't
too involved in that. And he was asking about the
different things he could do and that he could
take, and one of the things in the list was fencing.
And his response was, I damn sure won't do that.
I've done that all summer for my daddy. So I
remember asking Russ if he'd be teaching barbed
wire or chain link next semester. Now, do I
remember that the assistant or associate deans
kind of all sat near an exit area and you kind of,
after you got your schedule done? Everyone had to
come through. You had to sign off on the number of
hours and the courses they were taking. So we
looked at every one of them that went through
there. All right, now let's jump back before coeds
were here in very large numbers. summer school.
How did summer school differ from the two main
semesters? Well, I think the main difference was
we started at 7 o'clock in the morning. No air
conditioning, and so the sun was up early, and we
were up early, and we would go to our classes, and
most of the summer school was over by noon because
it got so hot in the buildings that you couldn't
learn or teach very well. Am I correct that Only the
library was air-conditioned? I don't think it was
even air-conditioned then. I think that was one of
the early ones. I remember graduating in G.
Raleigh White, and I was so dumb that I wore a suit
under my gown and thought I would die. It was so hot.
Air-conditioning was relatively late by my value
system. Right, so you're with Maxwell for about
how long? You're in liberal arts. About a year and a
half, and then I came involved in the cell study and
did that part of the time, too. Yes, yes, yes.
Describe that. What did that whole effort
include? This is 1962. No, no, no, 1972. 1972.
Well, it was not long after... Jack Williams came.
And I know I've told you the story about how I found
out that I was going to be the director. No. Did I
tell you that? I don't remember that. Well, I had
been asked to serve on one of the committees. And we
had a meeting of the academic council in the
conference room in the library. And Gordon Sweet
from the Southern Association came down. And
Horace Byers was there. John Calhoun. Wayne Hall,
I believe. But anyway, Gordon Sweet was not very
sweet. He was saying that what A&M proposed was an
absolute full-fledged flaming disaster and
Southern Association probably wouldn't approve
the way that A&M was proposing to do it. And so
Horace Byers said, well, Gordon, I'm glad you
brought that up because that's not what we're
going to do. Said, what you have is not right at all,
and Chuck McCandless is going to be the director of
the self-study. And that was the first I'd ever
heard of it. I was not asked. Incidentally, I told
this story not very long ago at our coffee meeting,
and John Calhoun says, I'm the guy who messed it up.
So anyway, after we got through, Bill Barzak, And
I, and Byers, and probably a couple other went over
to meet with Garden Suite. And so with great skill,
I picked out members of the steering committee,
and the only one who had any experience on any
accreditation was Bill Barzak, who had an
editorial responsibility in the previous
self-study meeting. So we got people who, Tim
Brundage and Chuck Sampson, Some others, none of
them had any knowledge of the cell study. And
because we knew so little about it, at least we were
committed by the Southern Association for having
a good cell study, which worked out well, because
in one of my first meetings with Jack Williams
about the cell study, he told me, Chuck, I know more
about cell studies than anybody in the country.
And he probably did. And I thought, I know less than
anyone in the country. And I know I was right. But it
was really a worthwhile learning experience for
all of us, because it gives you an opportunity to
learn a lot about all aspects of the university.
And what was most enjoyable from my point of view
was that for some strange reason, Bill and I were
asked to meet almost every time there was a group
looking at research in the university. At one of
the meetings they were in there and they were
really bad mouthing the administration of A&M
because the administration always gives lip
service to the importance of research But look who
gets all the rewards, and it's always the teaching
faculty." And I literally laughed out loud. I
said, I'm sorry, but you got to recognize, this is a
side of the coin I have never seen before. But they
were just as sincere as they could be that they
thought researchers were neglected. And the
other thing that was enjoyable for someone from
liberal arts and education was there was no
agreement as to what research is. other than it's
what that particular faculty member did. But you
take the people in social sciences, their
research was so different from people in cotton
genetics, and that was so different from physics.
Now, this self-study effort took about how long?
about two years so you were detached from your
associate deeming i was i started out doing both
and then and it was housed where uh in the reed
mcdonald building and were there did you have a key
associate bill barzak all right what about the
person did you have some people doing the
paperwork that were secretaries, staffers that
were particularly critical? Marilyn Melcher was
one who did cover the work and she was just a lovely,
lovely person and did a really good job. Did y'all
have any important recommendations? If in
hindsight now you agree? Oh, I'd have to think
back. I know that we were very pleased because
almost everything that we recommended was
accomplished before the visiting committee
came. And
we really did, I believe, and this may not be
totally objective, but I hope it is, we had a lot of
involvement of a lot of people.
And I think it made a significant difference in the
development. I'd have to go back and look at some of
the things that were recommended. Because I
remember saying at the very beginning that if
people believe that what they do makes a
difference, then they'll be willing to do it
again. If they feel like that it doesn't, then
they're not going to be very enthused. And that was
one of the major complaints going back to what I
said about Garden Suite. The way it was originally
set up, it was very heavily
administrator-oriented.
And one of the things that I heard somewhere in the
South State that I really think was important.
That is, the administration should keep its head
in and its hands off. And Jack Williams, again,
being the person that he was and the familiarity of
himself, did it extremely well. I don't know about
your case, but in my case, I wasn't aware of a
self-study in the early 60s. There must have been
one every 10 years, but I wasn't aware of it. And I
certainly was the one that you worked on. Let's go
back and talk about leadership.
Earl Rutter, describe his style and manner. He had
a military style. He was very much a believer in a
strong administration.
I think he believed that there really was a serious
business aspect to a university that had to be
considered.
I think Earl Rudder was clearly a man for his time. I
don't believe that A&M could be the university it
is today without Earl Rudder having been where he
was when he was. Why? I agree with you, but why? of a
number of reasons. One is that for the former
students in particular, that Earl Rudder was a
real Aggie, in quotes. And whatever that means to
any one of them, he was one. There was never any
doubt that he was a real Aggie and that what he
wanted for A&M had to be right for A&M.
If he said that it was okay for A&M to have optional
military training, then it must be okay. If it was
okay for women to come to A&M, then it must be okay.
Someone without the strong convictions about A&M
proposing those very same things would have had
great difficulty. We had a president who I did not
know well because I was too But what I didn't know
was very positive, it was David Morgan. And I think
David Morgan impressed me, at least, as someone
similar to Jack Williams. He was just too soon.
Yeah, he was too soon. And what he proposed for A&M
was not well received at all. Earl Rudder,
had, I think, some difficulty with some of the
faculty in that he was not an academician. Earl
Rudder
was not a polished